---
layout: post
title:  "Dynamic Recompilation Part 1"
date:   2020-04-01 12:00:00 +0100
categories: jekyll update
---

# Every journey has a first step...

## Preamble
The code that accompanies this series of articles is hosted [here][repository-url].

The topics discussed in this article are moderately advanced in nature.
They require a good grounding in what a microprocessor is and how registers and memory addressing works.

Some knowledge of assembly would also be advantageous but not strictly necessary.

I wouldn't advise using the recompiler developed in this series in production.
It's intended as a sketch from which one might develop a fully fledged recompiler. 
There are quite a number of deficiencies and I will do my best to point those out along the way.

## Introduction
I've always been fascinated by the topic of making software written for one type of computer run on another.
I've written a couple of emulators in the past, but I was truly in awe of those that used dynamic recompilation
to achieve the same. They were _fast_.

I haven't attempted to write a dynamic recompiler until now.
They're hard things to write and my understanding of the x86–64 instruction set is relatively limited.
And, I've been terrified of melting my computer.

The focus is going to be on trying to write parts of a dynamic recompiler for the MIPS R3000 microprocessor
(a derivative was used in the Playstation 1). Being a RISC processor it has a relatively small
instruction set, but it has pipeline hazards that might make things a little more interesting.

I'll be working with the System V AMD64 ABI[^1] calling conventions.
Windows users can follow along, but there are differences which means the examples
presented here won't work out of the box.

The term Host processor means the physical processor in your machine and
Guest processor means the processor you're trying to simulate.

Without further ado...

## Why dynamic recompilation?
The simplest approach to making software written for one processor family run
on another processor is to interpret it. A simplified interpreter might look something like this:

```c++
void GuestCPU::Interpret() {
    uint32_t instruction = ReadNextInstruction();
    switch (instruction) {
        case ADD: return InterpretAdd();
        case SUB: return InterpretSub();
        default:
            InterpretUndefined();
    }
}

int main() {
    GuestCPU cpu;
    while (true) {
        cpu.Interpret();
    }
    return 0;
}
```

The Interpret method fetches an instruction, makes an attempt to decode it, and
then performs some action or other. For older 8-bit, 16-bit and even in some cases
32-bit processors this approach can work quite well but this technique is not the fastest.

The act of fetching the next instruction causes a type of delay called an _Address Generation Interlock_.
The Interpreter has to increment the _Guest Program Counter_ and then fetch the next instruction from that location
in memory. This essentially inhibits instruction parallelism on modern processors where multiple
independent instructions can be executed at once[^2].

Modern processors try to make guesses about which path of a branch is going to be taken.
If they guess correctly then there's a performance increase; if not there's a penalty and these penalties can stack up.
The switch statement is particularly bad because you're essentially saying to your processor 
_"Here's north of 200 places where you could go next. Have fun with that."_

There are things you can do to alleviate this for a moderate speed gain, but
they're generally not supported across all compilers.

In addition to this there's usually the overhead of keeping the Guest Processor's 
status flags up to date. Arithmetic operations, for example, will typically need to
calculate the state of the Carry, Overflow, Zero, and Negative flags.
You can do this reasonably efficiently but the chances are the Host Processor already did
that calculation for you, and you can't access it trivially from a language like C++.

Dynamic recompilers can eliminate the Interlock, remove the need for much of the branch prediction
and take advantage of the Host processor's status register. Additionally, the smarter ones can analyse
and code being translated and optimise it even further.

## What is dynamic recompilation?
Dynamic recompilation is the process of taking machine instructions targeting one processor
family and translating them into instructions targeting another processor family at run time.

For example, we could take the MIPS instruction

```asm
ADDU R1, R2, R3
```

which adds **R2** and **R3** together and puts the result into **R1** and translate it to the
following x86–64 instructions, in Intel syntax[^3],

```asm
MOV EAX, ECX ; MOV EAX(R1), ECX(R2)
ADD EAX, EDX ; ADD EAX(R1), EDX(R3)
```

and then execute them.

Dynamic recompilers typically used to work by taking the Guest Program Counter and asking a
Translation Cache if the Guest code at that address has already been translated. 
If it has, then the existing translated code is executed. If not then the code gets translated
until the recompiler encounters a branch instruction. This new code is inserted into the cache
and then executed. After the branch the new Guest Program Counter is used to query the Translation Cache and so on.

Not all is plain sailing however, and we have to be mindful of self-modifying code. 
That is, code that rewrites itself effectively invalidates its own translation and
will need re-translating. For now, we're going to consider this an advanced topic and put it to one side.

## How do we do dynamic recompilation?
Machine code essentially boils down to a sequence of bytes. The task essentially is to take the 
series of bytes that the Guest Processor would understand and translate them into a series of
bytes the Host Processor can understand.

### Asking the OS for permission
We therefore need to store some bytes. But we can't store them anywhere,
a **std::vector** of **unsigned char** just won't do. We want to store the 
bytes somewhere where we can ask the Operating System very nicely to make 
those bytes executable by the Host processor.

On Linux/macOS we need to use **mmap** from **<sys/mman.h>**.

We need this function

```c++
void* Map(size_t length) {
    return mmap(nullptr, length, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
}
```

to request to map a block of memory with Read and Write permissions that isn't backed by a file
(**MAP_ANONYMOUS** and **-1** being passed as the file descriptor) with offset **0**.

To be good citizens and clean up after our selves we also will need

```c++
int Unmap(void* addr, size_t length) {
    return munmap(addr, length);
}
```

to un-map the memory at the end.

Finally, to make the block of memory executable we will need a method to remove the
Write-permissions and set the Executable-permission we will need the following.

```c++
int Protect(void* addr, size_t length) {
    return mprotect(addr, length, PROT_READ | PROT_EXEC);
}
```

This is necessary because it would be a very, very, very bad idea to take some
untrusted code and allow it to write to executable memory and thereby inject malicious
instructions into its own stream to execute.

Windows has similar functions in the forms of **VirtualAlloc**, **VirtualFree** and **VirtualProtect**.

# Providing a layer of abstraction
While this is all to the good, it's not very nice from the perspective of someone wanting to
write a dynamic recompiler. Let's wrap this block of memory in a helper class:

```c++
class CodeBuffer {
public:
    explicit CodeBuffer(size_t);
    ~CodeBuffer();
    void Protect();
    void Call();
    void Byte(uint8_t);
private:
    void* buffer;
    size_t length;
    size_t pos;
};
```

There's not too much to this. The constructor maps a block of memory of a given length whose
pointer to which gets stored in the **buffer** member. The destructor cleans up and the **Protect** method
makes the block of memory executable.

The **Byte** method puts a byte at the position indicated by **pos** and then increments **pos**.

The interesting method is **Call**.

```c++
void CodeBuffer::Call() {
    reinterpret_cast<void (*)()>(buffer)();
}
```

It recasts **buffer** as a no-argument function with a void return type and then calls it. 
We might want a more flexible solution with argument passing later but this should suffice for now.

### Putting it all together
We now have something that will allow us to execute arbitrary instructions on the Host.
Putting it together we get something like

```c++
CodeBuffer buffer(1024);
buffer.Byte(0xC3u);
buffer.Protect();
buffer.Call();
```

The function we're written is pretty trivial and does nothing other than immediately
return, **0xC3** being the code for the return instruction[^4][^5].


## Conclusion

In this article we've discussed why you might want to consider writing a Dynamic Recompiler, 
the basics around requesting executable memory and writing a simple do-nothing function.

[Next][part-next] time we'll discuss the x86–64 instruction set in some more detail and talk about
the System V AMD64 ABI requirements for stack-alignment.

## References
[^1]: [System V AMD64 ABI][system-v-amd64-abi]
[^2]: [Article on emulators.com about interpreter loops][interpreter-loops]
[^3]: [Intel vs AT&T syntax][wikipedia-intel-vs-at-t]
[^4]: [Intel Software Developer's Manual][intel-reference-manual]
[^5]: [Felix Cloutier's Intel Online Reference][intel-online-reference-cloutier]

[repository-url]: https://github.com/RichardBrown384/mostly-incomplete-mips-jit-tutorial
[system-v-amd64-abi]: https://wiki.osdev.org/System_V_ABI
[interpreter-loops]: http://www.emulators.com/docs/nx25_nostradamus.htm
[wikipedia-intel-vs-at-t]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_assembly_language#Syntax
[intel-reference-manual]: https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/download/intel-64-and-ia-32-architectures-sdm-combined-volumes-1-2a-2b-2c-2d-3a-3b-3c-3d-and-4.html
[intel-online-reference-cloutier]: https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/
[part-next]: {{ site.baseurl }}/{{ page.next.url }}