---
layout: post
title:  "Dynamic Recompilation Part 8"
date:   2024-02-13 12:00:00 +0100
categories: jekyll update
---

# You are invited to spend an hilarious weekend in the English countryside

## Introduction
In this, the last and final part of the series, we're going to talk about 
branch instructions. Branch instructions are needed for things like loops
and function calls.

We're going to discuss the role branch instructions play in a recompiler
and what that means for our implementation.

Before implementing branch instructions in either the interpreter or the
recompiler we're going to discuss another MIPS feature called the 
**branch delay-slot**.

We're also going to examine the role exceptions play in **branch delay-slots**.

In the conclusion we're going to wrap up the series and talk about
the things that would need to be changed in order to make the recompiler
actually useful.

## Recap
In the [last][part-07-5] part we discussed other hypothetical ways a MIPS recompiler
might handle **load delay-slots**. This included the idea of possibly reordering
instructions and talking briefly about **Single static-assignment form** and 
how this could help.

There were no code changes, and so we'll continue in this part to adapt our existing
recompiler to handle branches.

## We've gone on holiday by mistake
Let's take a look at what branches are and how they are used with reference to C++.

Branch instructions are the special magic sauce that make things like loops and function
calls possible. 

If you're looking at the following C++ loop

```c++
int i = 12;
int j = 9;
while (i > 0) {
    j += 1;
    i -= 1;
}
```

then, assuming our compiler doesn't do any optimisation, there's a fair chance the underlying 
MIPS assembly may look something like

```asm
    LWI R4, 12     ; load 12 into R4 (i)
    LWI R5, 9      ; load 9 into R5 (j)
loop:
    ADDI R5, 1     ; add 1 to R5 (j)
    SUBI R4, 1     ; subtract 1 from R4 (i)
    BGTZ R4, loop  ; if R4 greater than zero then go back to loop (ADDI R5, 1)
    NOP
```

The last instruction, **BGTZ** (branch greater than zero), will make the processor 
jump back the **ADDI** instruction if the contents of **R4** are greater than zero,
otherwise the processor continues to the **NOP** instruction. It does this 
by manipulating the processor's **Program Counter**.

**BGTZ** is an example of a **conditional** branch instruction.

A C++ function call

```c++
void MyFunc1() {
    ...
    MyFunc2();
    ...
}

void MyFunc2() {
    ...
}
```

may, in MIPS assembly, look something like this

```asm
my_func_1:
    ...
    J my_func_2
    NOP
    ...
    
my_func_2:
    ...
```

After executing the **J** (Jump) instruction the processor's **Program Counter** is changed
to the address of the instruction at the **my_func_2** label.

This is an example of an **unconditional** branch as the processor doesn't evaluate any arithmetic
comparison before changing the **Program Counter**.

Now that we have an overview of what branches are let's discuss what they mean for a dynamic
recompiler.

## Listen, we're bona fide, we're not from London
All the way back in [Part 1][part-01-0] we mentioned that the way Dynamic Recompilers often work 
is to recompile the guest code until they encounter a branch instruction. Why is that?

To answer that question let's examine an approximation of a Dynamic Recompiler's main loop

```c++
while (true) {
    const uint32_t pc = processor.GetPC();
    void* code = codeCache.Get(pc);
    if (!code) {
        code = codeCache.Put(pc, RecompileCode(processor, pc));
    }
    // reinterpret code as a function pointer and call
    reinterpret_cast<void (*)()>(code)();
}
```

What the loop is doing is first making a note of the Guest Processor's **Program Counter**. It's
then querying something called a **Code Cache** for recompiled code it may have at that address.
If there is no code found then it recompiles the Guest Code at the **Program Counter** and
puts it in the cache. Finally, it calls the recompiled function and, crucially, it expects it to return.
When it returns the recompiled code is expected to have updated the Guest Processor's **Program Counter** 
so that the cache can be queried again.

_Note_: It's worth mentioning at this point that sometimes Recompilers check for external interrupts here.
Real processors check for interrupts after every instruction, but it's usually sufficient, at least for
simulating MIPS and later processors, to check for them less often.

Branch instructions are therefore important because they can change the Guest **Program Counter** in
a non-sequential manner. This is why once recompilers encounter a branch instruction they stop recompiling 
and emit code to return control back to the main program.

As always, however, this statement about stopping whenever a branch instruction is encountered 
isn't strictly true. Let's consider the first example in the previous section as to why

```asm
my_prog:
    LWI R4, 12     ; load 12 into R4 (i)
    LWI R5, 9      ; load 9 into R5 (j)
loop:
    ADDI R5, 1     ; add 1 to R5 (j)
    SUBI R4, 1     ; subtract 1 from R4 (i)
    BGTZ R4, loop  ; if R4 greater than zero then go back to loop (ADDI R5, 1)
    NOP
```

Let's assume that the Guest **Program Counter** is at `my_prog` and the **Code Cache** is empty.

When the main loop queries the **Code Cache** at `my_prog` no code is found since the cache is empty. 
The recompiler will then start recompiling the code at `my_prog` and continue until it has recompiled **BGTZ**.

This code will then get executed and when this code returns the Guest **Program Counter** will be at `loop`.

The main loop will now query the **Code Cache** and find no code at `loop`. The main loop will then recompile
everything between `loop` and **BGTZ** and execute it.

The problem with this is that we've effectively recompiled the same block of code twice. This means that

1. we do almost twice the amount of work we need to and
2. we use almost twice as much space as we needed to.

A better approach here would be to implement some kind of loop detection and only recompile the code once.
(When a branch is found to be part of loop then rather than stopping the recompilation there and then, the
recompiler continues).

The second example is also not without its problems. If for example, `MyFunc2` is very small,

```c++
void MyFunc1() {
    ...
    MyFunc2();
    ...
}

void MyFunc2() {
    x += 1;
}
```

then in some cases it might make sense to have the recompiler follow the branch and effectively 
inline the function in the recompiled code. The above would then become

```c++
void MyFunc1() {
    ...
    x += 1;
    ...
}
```

Deciding when to do this should probably be left to some heuristic. If you do it too often, you might end up
recompiling `MyFunc2` multiple times, which might not be what we want. On the other hand, if you don't do 
it all you might not be able to optimise small functions.

## Don't threaten me with a dead fish!
Having talked about branches and recompilers in general, it's now time to turn our attention
to another fun aspect of the early MIPS architecture, the **branch delay-slot**!

Branches, like loads, on MIPS processors don't take effect immediately and take an extra instruction
to complete. Instructions immediately following a branch are said to be in the **branch delay-slot**,
and they are always executed.

```asm
BGTZ R4, loop     ; branch
ADD R5, R1, R2    ; branch delay-slot, R5 is updated then branch taken
```

**Branch delay-slots** are a consequence of the early MIPS instruction pipeline design. For purposes
of argument, let's assume there are three stages (the reality is that there were five, but three should
be sufficient to illustrate the problem). The first stage would contain the instruction just fetched
from memory, the second stage would contain the instruction that's been decoded and about to be executed and
the third stage would contain the instruction that's currently been executed.

In the situation above the **BGTZ** instruction is in the 3rd stage and the **ADD** instruction is in the second.
By the time the processor has completely executed the **BGTZ** instruction, the **ADD** instruction 
is already being moved into the third stage. In the early MIPS pipeline it's therefore impossible to stop 
the **ADD** instruction from being executed[^1].

This could have been avoided by doing something like flushing the pipeline, but then the processor would have 
to waste two instruction cycles refilling the pipeline before it could resume doing useful work again, effectively
stalling the processor. The MIPS designers decided it would be better not stall the CPU completely and 
elected instead to only have a single instruction delay. Besides, they thought, you could put an instruction
that did useful work in the **branch delay-slot**. 

This is same design philosophy that influenced the **load delay-slot** but the reality, in most cases,
turned out to be

```asm
BGTZ R4, loop    ; branch
NOP              ; do nothing
```

A later revision of the MIPS architecture (R4000) introduced the **Branch Likely** class of instructions that allowed
you to prevent the instruction in the **branch delay-slot** from being executed and an even later revision
removed them again because they caused problems with parallelism.

## I have of late — but wherefore I know not — lost all my mirth...
Although it was common practice putting **NOP** into branch delay-slots our recompiler is going to have
to handle cases when the compiler or programmer elected to put a meaningful instruction into a branch delay-slot.

Where things get interesting is when the compiler decided to put an instruction that can cause an exception
in the branch delay-slot.

Consider as an example

```asm
loop:
    ...
    BGTZ R4, loop    ; branch
    LW R2, (R3)      ; load R2 with contents of (R3)
    ADD R5, R8, R9   ; 
```

and let's assume that during the execution of the **LW** instruction an exception occurs.

Normally, the processor would notify **Coprocessor 0** that an exception has happened and tell it that
the exception happened at the address of the **LW** instruction. The coprocessor will then instruct the
processor to invoke an exception handling routine, and upon returning from the handling routine 
the processor will try to execute the **LW** instruction again.

Usually the processor would then proceed to the **ADD** instruction. But this isn't what we want.
Had the **LW** instruction completed normally in the first place the processor would have branched back to **loop**. 
But as it stands the processor can't differentiate between the two circumstances and the processor is now executing the
wrong instructions.

How was this solved? Well the MIPS designers observed that re-executing the branch instruction is 
harmless in all cases (branch instructions themselves can't raise exceptions). So they decided that
when an exception occurs in a branch delay-slot the address of the **branch** is passed to 
**Coprocessor 0**. Now when the exception handling routine returns, execution resumes at the branch.

If you recall back in [Part 5][part-05-0] the exception handling method we added to **Coprocessor 0** 
took a **branch** parameter

```c++
uint32_t COP0::EnterException(uint32_t code, uint32_t epc, uint32_t branch) {
    WriteRegisterMasked(SR, 0x0000003Fu, ReadRegister(SR) << 2u);
    WriteRegisterMasked(CAUSE, 0x8000007Cu, (branch << 31u) + ((code & 0x1Fu) << 2u));
    WriteRegister(EPC, epc);
    return BOOT_EXCEPTION_VECTOR;
}
```

and bit 31 (called the **BD** field in the MIPS documentation) of the **CAUSE** register is set
accordingly. The **BD** field is there to tell exception handling routines that the instruction 
that raised the exception was at **EPC + 4** and not at **EPC** in these cases.

This code also assumes that the caller is passing the correct value of the **Exception
Program Counter** (the epc parameter). 

This means, that to begin with at the very least, we're going to have to modify our **EnterException**
method that we've been using to date to take an extra parameter

```c++
void EnterException(R3051* r3051, uint32_t code, uint32_t branch) {
    const uint32_t epc = ReadPC(r3051);
    const uint32_t pc = r3051->Cop0().EnterException(code, epc, branch);
    WritePC(r3051, pc);
}
```

This also unfortunately means that we're going to have to modify the code around **StoreWord** and **LoadWord**.
They call **EnterException** and therefore they're going to need to be able to pass the correct information
as the **branch parameter.

The simplest approach would be to write the branch slot information back to the interpreter prior to
attempting to interact with memory. This will work, but it's one more thing we have to remember to do.
Alternatively, we could change **StoreWord** and **LoadWord** to take a branch parameter or, we could
stop relying on **StoreWord** and **LoadWord** to do so much work for us and move more of their code 
into the recompiler.

The example in this section also touches upon another problem with load delay-slots. In the [last][part-07-5] 
part we discussed how me might, with the aid of **Static single-assignment**, potentially eliminate
the need for load delay-slots in the recompiler by arranging things so that we never returned control
back to the recompiler with the Guest Processor about to execute a load delay-slot instruction.

However, with a load instruction in a branch delay-slot, at the moment our naive recompiler will
do this. It might be possible to work around this by having the recompiler always follow the branch 
instruction if there's a load instruction in the branch delay-slot, but this is left as an exercise for the
reader.

## Have you got soup? Why don't I get any soup?

## Conclusion

## References
[^1]: [Pipeline stall][wiki-pipeline-stall]

[wiki-pipeline-stall]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_stall
[part-01-0]: {% post_url 2020-04-01-part-01-0 %}
[part-05-0]: {% post_url 2020-04-06-part-05-0 %}
[part-07-5]: {% post_url 2024-02-12-part-07-5 %}