---
layout: post
title:  "Dynamic Recompilation Part 7.5"
date:   2024-02-12 12:00:00 +0100
categories: jekyll update
---

# The future is history

## Introduction
In this part we're going to discuss some potential alternative approaches 
for handling **load delay-slots**.

The discussion is going to be fairly light and not include any code changes to our 
experimental recompiler.

We're going to explore how we might manipulate the instructions before recompiling,
to make the recompiler's job easier.

## Recap
In the [last][part-07-0] part we discussed how to implement the **LW** instruction and
how to handle **load delay-slots** inherent in the early MIPS architecture.

```c++
void EmitLw(RecompilerState &state, EmitterX64 &emitter, R3051 &processor, uint32_t opcode) {
    // Load word
    Label resume = emitter.NewLabel();
    const uint32_t rt = InstructionRt(opcode);
    if (state.GetLoadDelaySlot()) {
        const uint32_t dr = state.GetLoadDelayRegister();
        if (rt != dr) {
            WriteGuestRegisterFromStack(emitter, processor, dr);
        }
        state.SetLoadDelaySlot(false);
    }
    // Restore the program counter
    CallInterpreterFunction(emitter, AddressOf(WritePC), processor, 0xBADC0FFE);
    // Call load word
    CallLoadWord(emitter, processor, opcode);
    // Return from recompiled function in event of an exception
    emitter.TestALImm8(1u);
    emitter.Jne(resume);
    CallSetLoadDelayValue(emitter, processor);
    CallInterpreterFunction(emitter, AddressOf(SetLoadDelayRegister), processor, 0u);
    CallInterpreterFunction(emitter, AddressOf(SetLoadDelaySlotNext), processor, false);
    CallInterpreterFunction(emitter, AddressOf(SetLoadDelaySlot), processor, false);
    emitter.MovR64R64(RSP, RBP);
    emitter.PopR64(RBP);
    emitter.Ret();
    emitter.Bind(resume);
    // Update recompiler state
    state.SetLoadDelaySlotNext(true);
    state.SetLoadDelayRegister(rt);
}
```

We extended the **Emitter** to handle the **LEA** instruction and used that
to interact with the local variables on the stack.

## No Delay-Slot, No Problems!
The motivation here is to ask ourselves the question **Do we really need that 
load delay-slot mess at all?**

Consider the following case, which is a pretty common given that a lot
of compilers didn't attempt to put useful work into delay-slots,

```asm
LW R2, (R3)     ; load instruction
NOP             ; load delay-slot
```

Given that nothing interacts with **R2** or **R3** in the delay-slot our recompiler
may as well just go ahead and complete the load immediately. It makes
no difference if the delayed load is completed before or after the **NOP**
instruction.

What about when the compiler did decide to put work into a load-delay slot?
When the delay-slot instruction doesn't use **R2** or **R3** then it doesn't make 
any difference if the load is completed before or after the delay-slot 
instruction

```asm
LW R2, (R3)     ; load instruction
ADD R5, R6, R7  ; load delay-slot, don't care about the value of R2!
```

so we may as well go ahead and complete the load immediately prior to the **ADD** instruction.

## I believe you have my stapler!
What about when **R2** is used in the delay-slot instruction?

When **R2** is used as an input

```asm
LW R2, (R3)     ; load instruction
ADD R5, R2, R7  ; load delay-slot, we want the old value of R2!
```

then we could achieve the same result by reordering the instructions and executing them out of order

```asm
ADD R5, R2, R7  ; Do the addition first, since we want the old value of R2
LW R2, (R3)     ; load R2 immediately, don't have a delay-slot.
```

This will work in most cases, but it's possible that in the original order the **LW** raised an exception,
and that the **ADD** was never executed, which is not the case in this reordered version.

Another way to solve this problem is to imagine that the MIPS architecture has an additional
register **R32**. We can then keep the original order 

```
MOV R32, R2      ; Store the current value of R2 in R32
LW R2, (R3)      ; load instruction, complete immediately
ADD R5, R32, R7  ; load delay-slot, we want the old value of use old value of R2 in R32
```

and achieve the same result.

What about when **R2** is used as an output?

```asm
LW R2, (R3)     ; load instruction
ADD R2, R6, R7  ; load delay-slot, R2 is going to get immediately overwritten
```

when **R2** is used as an output of the load delay-slot instruction it's going to immediately
get overwritten, so there's no point performing the **ADD** instruction, so we may as well
remove it from our recompiled code (see caveats below).

## I asked for a Mai Tai, and they brought me a Piña Colada
What about **R3**?

When **R3** is used as an input

```asm
LW R2, (R3)      ; load instruction
ADD R5, R3, R7   ; load delay-slot
```

then we can go ahead and complete the load immediately prior to the **ADD**.

But when **R3** is the output then it depends on **R2** being used as an input.

When **R2** isn't being used

```asm
LW R2, (R3)      ; load instruction
ADD R3, R6, R7   ; load delay-slot, overwriting load instruction input.
```

Then we can go ahead and complete the load immediately prior to the **ADD** instruction.

When **R2** is being used as an input,

```asm
LW R2, (R3)      ; load instruction
ADD R3, R2, R7   ; load delay-slot, overwriting load instruction input and using old value of R2
```

we appeal once more to our imaginary extra register **R32**

```asm
MOV R32, R2       ; make a note of R2 in R32
LW R2, (R3)       ; load instruction, complete immediately
ADD R3, R32, R7   ; load delay slot, wants the old value of R2 
```

we can then convert our load instructions into ones that completes immediately.

_Note_: in this case even if reordering was desirable it's not possible since 
doing the **ADD** first will change the value of **R3** and change the load address.

## It's not a place you can get to by boat or train
Maybe it's time to bring to bear a degree of realism to the point of the imaginary register **R32**.

The idea was in part motivated by **Static single-assignment form**[^1] or **SSA** for short.
**SSA** is used by more advanced recompilers as their **Intermediate Representation**.

The way that **SSA** works is transform every assignment into a unique variable. Consider the following
contrived example

```
x = x * x + 1
x = x + y + 2
```

then **SSA**, given `x_0` and `y_0` as initial values for `x` and `y`, will rewrite the example as follows

```
x_1 = x_0 * x_0 + 1
x_2 = x_1 + y_0 + 2
```

This representation makes certain code analysis operations easier, and it can be used in Register Allocation
algorithms. It might be also able to make keeping track of delay-slots at code emission time unnecessary.

Let's recast 

```asm
LW R2, (R3)      ; load instruction
ADD R3, R2, R7   ; load delay-slot, using old value of R2
```

in **SSA** form (given **R2_0**, **R3_0** and **R7_0** for the initial values) this might look like

```
R2_1 = (R3_0)
R3_1 = R2_0 + R7_0
```

thereby giving us a delay-slot free intermediate representation of MIPS instructions.

It should be stressed this discussion is mostly theoretical and there are many details to
worked out in an actual implementation. Hopefully it's clear that if we were to turn
our MIPS instructions into an intermediate form that can be manipulated prior to recompiling
we can do much better than we can with our current approach.

## Caveat emptor
In the above discussion we discussed the case of instructions in load delay-slots doing useless work
and then removing or **nullifying** them

```asm
LW R2, (R3)     ; load instruction
ADD R2, R6, R7  ; load delay-slot, R2 is going to get immediately overwritten
```

There are cases however, where although the immediate result is discarded, there are side effects at work.

Consider

```asm
LW R2, (R4) ; initial load, discarded because the next instruction targets the same register
LW R2, (R5) ; cancels the previous load
```

In this example the first load instruction, from the **R3051**'s point of view is redundant. However,
if the address pointed to **R4** is mapped to the read buffer of a CD-ROM drive, then we 
might have needed the discarded load to service the read buffer. By nullifying the instruction
entirely we might cause problems when interacting with the CD-ROM drive later.

## The devil is in the detail
Finally, it's probably worth discussing the Toxic Twins of the MIPS instruction set, **LWL** and **LWR**.

These two instructions can can access the value about to be loaded in the delay-slot. This is known as 
*forwarding*.

The typical usage might be

```asm
LWL R1, 0(R2)  ; load word left at R2
LWR R1, 3(R2)  ; delay-slot, load word right at R2 + 3
ADD R8, R1, R1 ; delay-slot
ADD R3, R1, R4
```

so that a non-aligned 32-bit word can be loaded into **R1**. The **LWR** in the load delay slot
has access to the value loaded by **LWL** so that it can combine the values bitwise.

In our synthetic **SSA** form it might look something like

```
R1_1 = 0(R2_0)
R1_2 = (3(R2_0) & 0xFF) + (R1_1 & ~0xFF)
R8_1 = R1_0 + R1_0
R3_1 = R1_2 + R4_0
```

and would hopefully allow us to treat the delay-slots relatively cleanly.

_Note_: The bitmasks in this example are only illustrative. The actual values
used depend on the address in question and the endianness of the system
amongst other things.

## Conclusion
In this part we considered an alternative approach to handling load-delay slots.

We considered instruction reordering and Static single-assignment form. 

We also discussed some potential problems in nullifying instructions with side effects and talked
briefly about **LWL** and **LWR**.

In the next and final part, we'll deal with the last class of instruction, branches.

## References
[^1]: [Static single-assignment form][wiki-static-single-assignment]

[wiki-static-single-assignment]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single-assignment_form
[part-07-0]: {% post_url 2020-04-08-part-07-0 %}